VS-263 notes on ingest and beyond (#7618)
broadinstitute/gatk: scripts/variantstore/AOU_GVS_WORKSPACE.md

These are the required parameters which must be supplied to the workflow:

| Parameter              | Description |
|------------------------| ----------- |
| project_id             | The name of the google project containing the dataset |
| dataset_name           | The name of the dataset you created above       |
| external\_sample_names | Sample ids from the data model that will be mapped to gvs ids       |
| workspace_namespace    | The namespace of the workspace       |

> | workspace_name         | The name of the workspace       |

Reviewer: I thought we didn't need these anymore?

These are the required parameters which must be supplied to the workflow:

| Parameter             | Description |
|-----------------------| ----------- |
| project_id            | The name of the google project containing the dataset |
| dataset_name          | The name of the dataset you created above       |
| external\_sample_name | The name of the sample from the data model |
| gvs\_sample_id        | The gvs_id from the data model |
| interval_list         | The interval list to use |

**Note:**
Samples that will be batched and loaded together must be put into a sample_set ahead of time, otherwise their loading may cause conflicts.
This workflow must be done piecemeal if over 4000 samples are to be loaded as only 4000 samples can be loaded in at a time. The best way to do this currently is to create sample_sets of 4000 samples each.

> The workflow can then be run once for each sample_set. if the same sample_set is inadvertantly run twice the workflow will detect that the samples already exist in the system and the second duplicate workflow will fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflow can then be run once for each sample_set. If the same sample_set is inadvertently run twice the workflow will detect that the samples already exist in the system and the workflow will fail.
```

If any of the imports have failed on a single sample, check that all of the other samples have been loaded in that sample_set during that workflow. Sometimes a sample will fail during loading while there are still samples in the queue waiting for loading to begin. Because of the failure, these samples will not be loaded at all.
Keep track of the samples that have not been loaded whether because they failed, or because they were in the queue when another sample failed. They will need to be added later.

Once all sample_sets have been run, if there have been any failures, collect all non-loaded samples together in a new sample_set and load that in.

> 

Author: should I make a ticket for this?

> 

Reviewer: Like the other queries that you include in this doc, you could include a sample query that lists all the samples that are in the `sample_info` table but not in the `sample_load_status`, which means the loading was never kicked off.  The user could use this instead of having to keep track during ingest in order to figure out which samples those were.

Check the status table to see what samples have a STARTED log, but no FINISHED log.

> `SELECT info.sample_name, info.sample_id from `aou-genomics-curation-prod.beta2_99k.sample_info` as info left join `aou-genomics-curation-prod.beta2_99k.sample_load_status` as status on info.sample_id=status.sample_id where status.sample_id is null order by info.sample_id`

Reviewer: I'd take out the project id (aou-genomics-curation-prod) and (beta2_99k) in these queries and instead use a generic <gvs google project id> and <gvs dataset name> or something similar.

A sample cannot be partially loaded into a single table, however it is possible for a sample to fail before it has been loaded into all the necessary tables. A sample may be loaded into either a vet or ref_ranges table, but not the other.
For the samples that failed during import, it's important to check if they were loaded into either the vet and ref_ranges table. They may have been loaded into both--in which case, yay! That sample is all set.
They may have been loaded into neither, in which case they will need to be loaded again with the other non-loaded samples. If they are in the vet table, but not the ref_ranges table or the reverse, you will need to remove them from that table with the following query:
`DELETE FROM beta2_99k.ref_ranges_015 WHERE sample_id = 56238`
`DELETE FROM beta2_99k.sample_load_status WHERE sample_id IN (56238)`

### 3.3 Update the is_loaded field
This is currently a manual step.
Run

update `spec-ops-aou.aou_gvs_template.sample_info` set is_loaded = TRUE where cast(sample_id as STRING) in (

> select partition_id from `spec-ops-aou.aou_gvs_template.INFORMATION_SCHEMA.PARTITIONS` where total_logical_bytes > 0 AND table_name like 'vet_%'

Reviewer: see above note about generic project/dataset name

Reviewer: Also, please format SQL as code in the markup.

**Note:** This workflow does not use the Terra Entity model to run, so be sure to select `Run workflow with inputs defined by file paths`

To calibrate the cost of this workflow, two things must be considered.
The first is the compute cost which can be easily collected from Terra.

> The second is the query cost which takes a bit more digging to find. Each TB of data scanned costs $5, and to find how much data was scanned, you'll need to search in the logs of each shard.

Reviewer: Also, why is cost mentioned only in this step?  Do we want to go into cost in this doc?

> The second is the query cost which takes a bit more digging to find. Each TB of data scanned costs $5, and to find how much data was scanned, you'll need to search in the logs of each shard.

Author: maybe not---but I do want us to be tracking how to find out about cost! And I dont know where that should live

**Note:** This workflow does not use the Terra Entity model to run, so be sure to select `Run workflow with inputs defined by file paths`

Sometimes this workflow will fail because the Gaussians have not cenverged. Dont panic! It can happen to anyone's data!

> The first step in this case will be to adjust the Guassian for the failed step (there are two possible steps: model creation for the SNPS and model creation for the InDels) to a lower number.

Reviewer: Please include the specific inputs names for the gaussian values to change so that the user can fill them out easily.

You can then kick off the workflow again. If that still does not work, or you would prefer to not change the number of Guassians, then you can remove a column from the model creation

> TODO: How do you remove a column from the model creation?

Reviewer: I don't know if we want to include this in the docs, since we don't have a real process for it.

Author: like completely skip that a column could be removed? or specifically the TODO?

Reviewer: We don't have a real process for how to pick which column (if that's the same as annotation) to remove.
